docs: translate remaining .md files to .rst (#2083)
canonical/charmcraft: docs/reference/files/metadata-yaml-file.rst

.. _metadata-yaml-file:

``metadata.yaml`` file
======================

> .. The last version of this doc to show all the keys at once, in a long spec with
> .. comments, was version 22.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is no longer relevant since that discourse history is going to disappear.

This document describes the ``metadata.yaml`` file in your charm project.

.. caution::

    Starting with Charmcraft 2.5, the ``metadata.yaml`` file is created
    automatically from information you provide in the :ref:`charmcraft-yaml-file`. For
    backwards compatibility, Charmcraft will continue to allow the use of the
    ``metadata.yaml`` file, but you may not duplicate keys across the two files.

.. important::

>     The ``charmcraft.yaml`` file follows keywords similar to snaps. On the other hand, the
>     ``metadata.yaml`` does not. As a result, when ``charmcraft pack`` generates the file, some
>     keywords may differ -- e.g., the ``title``  key from ``charmcraft.yaml`` is rendered as
>     ``display-name`` in ``metadata.yaml``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The ``charmcraft.yaml`` file follows keywords similar to snaps, but 
    ``metadata.yaml`` does not. As a result, when ``charmcraft pack`` generates 
    the file, some keys may differ -- e.g., the ``title``  key from ``charmcraft.yaml``
    is rendered as ``display-name`` in ``metadata.yaml``.
```

This file contains identifying and configuration information about the charm.
Identifying information is used to describe the charm, its author, and its purpose; it
is indexed by `Charmhub`_ to enable easy discovery of charms.
Configuration information is provided by the charm author to inform
`Juju`_ how and where to deploy the charm depending on the
intended platform, storage requirements, resources, and possible integrations.

The file is a YAML dictionary and consists of a number of keys and their values. There
are 3 keys that are required for all charms: `name`_, `summary`_ , and `description`_.
Then, also keys that are required only for Kubernetes charms, e.g., `containers`_.
Additionally, 15+ optional keys. Finally, any number of arbitrary keys; these can
serve to keep track of other choices a charmer might make.

.. dropdown:: Minimal ``metadata.yaml``

    .. code-block:: yaml

        name: mongodb
        summary: A document database
        description: A database that stores JSON-like data.

.. dropdown:: ``metadata.yaml`` for a Kubernetes charm

>     .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer: The minimal file above is probably not worth separating, but this example and the full spec may be better off as their own yaml files that we use `literalinclude`s for. Amongst other things, they'll get linting applied to them by yamllint.

Reviewer 2: For the sake of time, we'll just leave as-is and come back to this later.

of a charm various features that a Juju model must be able to provide to ensure that the
charm can be successfully deployed on it. When a charm comes preloaded with such
requirements, this enables Juju to perform a pre-deployment check and to display
user-friendly error messages if a feature requirement cannot be met by the model that
the user is trying to deploy the charm to. If the assumes section of the charm metadata
is omitted, Juju will make a best-effort attempt to deploy the charm, and users must
rely on the output of ``juju status`` to figure out whether the deployment was successful.
The ``assumes`` key is available since 2.9.23.

**Structure:** The key consists of a list of features that can be given either directly
or, depending on the complexity of the condition you want to enforce, nested under one
or both of the boolean expressions ``any-of`` or ``all-of``, as shown below. In order for a
charm to be deployed, all entries in the ``assumes`` block must be satisfied.

.. code-block:: yaml

    assumes:
        - <feature_name>
        - any-of:
            - <feature_name>
            - <feature_name>
        - all-of:
            - <feature_name>

>             - <feature_name>

Reviewer: This is rendering incorrectly:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8c7ebe23-5b00-4bb9-b996-ebe9763197ac)

Reviewer 2: This is caused by accidental 4-space indentation.

    # It can be one of root, sudoer or non-root.
    # Added in Juju 3.6.0. If not specified, root is assumed.
    charm-user: <one of root, sudoer or non-root>

``containers``
--------------

    See also: `resources <#resources>`_

**Status:** Required for Kubernetes charms (except for proxy charms running on
Kubernetes).

**Purpose:** The ``containers`` key allows you to define a map of containers to be created
adjacent to the charm (as a sidecar, in the same pod).

**Structure:** This key consists of a list of containers along with their specification.
Each container can be specified in terms of ``resource``, ``bases``, ``uid``, ``gid`` and
``mounts``, where one of either the ``resource`` or the ``bases`` subkeys must be defined, and
``mounts`` is optional. ``resource`` stands for the OCI image resource used to create the
container; to use it, specify  an OCI image resource name (that you will then define
further in the `resources`_ block). ``bases`` is a list of bases to be used
for resolving a container image, in descending order of preference; to use it, specify a
base name (for example, ``ubuntu``, ``centos``, ``windows``, ``osx``, ``opensuse``), a

> [channel](https://snapcraft.io/docs/channels), and an architecture. ``mounts`` is a list

Reviewer: [Hey! You got your Markdown in my rST!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7oD_oX-Gio)

          shared: true | false

          # (Optional) Indicates if the storage should be made read-only (where possible)
          read-only: true | false

          # (Optional) The number of storage instances to be requested
          multiple:
              range: <n> | <n>-<m> | <n>- | <n>+

          # (Optional) Minimum size of requested storage in forms G, GiB, GB. Size
          # multipliers are M, G, T, P, E, Z or Y. With no multiplier supplied, M
          # is implied.
          minimum-size: <n>| <n><multiplier>

          # (Optional) List of properties, only supported value is "transient"
          properties:
              - transient

``subordinate``
---------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) True if the charm is meant to be deployed as a subordinate to a
    # principal charm
    subordinate: true | false

``summary``
-----------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Required) A short, one-line description of the charm
    summary: <summary>

``terms``
---------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) A list of terms that any charm user must agree with
    terms:
        - <term>

``website``
-----------

.. important::

>     In :ref:`recipes <charmcraft-yaml-file>`, this is now the ``links.website`` key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In :literalref:`charmcraft.yaml <charmcraft-yaml-file>`, this is now the ``links.website`` key.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) A string (or a list of strings) containing a link (or links) to project websites.
    # In general this is likely to be the upstream project website, or the formal website for the
    # charmed offering.
    website: <url> | [<urls>]

> ``Other keys``
> --------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other keys
----------
```

In addition to the keys mentioned above, a ``metadata.yaml`` file may also contain other
arbitrary keys. These can serve to keep track of other choices a charmer might make. In
some cases these become semi-official, being adopted by many charmers and even
incorporated into CI processes. An example is

> :literalref:`upstream source <https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/blob/b22fcdba3b894004468abfbf45caa54d93fbf7d0/charmcraft/templates/init-simple/metadata.yaml.j2#L40-L43>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:literalref:`upstream source <https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/blob/b22fcdba3b894004468abfbf45caa54d93fbf7d0/charmcraft/templates/init-simple/metadata.yaml.j2#L40-L43>`.
```

> incorporated into CI processes. An example is
> :literalref:`upstream source <https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/blob/b22fcdba3b894004468abfbf45caa54d93fbf7d0/charmcraft/templates/init-simple/metadata.yaml.j2#L40-L43>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
incorporated into CI processes.
```

Let's cut this, because it isn't appropriate to provide such a specific example for an open-ended syntax.

Reviewer 3: This was added on purpose as an example of how thisv unofficial key is used by convention to point to this upstream source. 

Links to specific pieces of existing charm yaml and code from the charm ecosystem are a pattern we've deliberately tried to use in both Charmcraft and Ops docs as they are a lightweight yet very powerful way to make a point.

Reviewer 2: We were wondering about this one. The linked code was removed from the repo a while back, so it looked to me like it was a historical artifact that's no longer current.

The main reason for removal was the link breaks the linter. There's no way around that at the moment, and GH doesn't have a built-in shortener.

Since the code isn't live in the repo and therefore the reader can't be reassured of its currency, I suggest we simply copy it verbatim here.

Reviewer 3: As I was saying, linking to real examples of charm code has been a pattern we've followed in other places in the docs too, on purpose and for a good reason -- it makes it possible to keep the docs quite generic and clean while still giving people a sense of what the content covered in the docs looks like in the wild. The fact that the linter doesn't like it doesn't seem to me a good reason to undo this pattern.

Reviewer 2: So that we don't lose this important snippet, can we copy the code in verbatim? We do that quite a bit in Starcraft docs.

Reviewer: Since we're now using sphinx I wonder if we can use a `literalinclude`  to the path? I don't know if that works with a path outside the docs root, but maybe a symlink could work around that?

I would prefer to include other text on the page rather than linking to it, but if we can avoid having another copy to maintain that would also be preferable.

Reviewer 2: > if we can use a literalinclude to the path

I think we're conflating intersphinx features and literalinclude. The latter expects a local file, so we'd have to first get the text from a specific Git commit – not simple.

JJ's latest commit is a simple way to address the question for now: [f45b51b](https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/pull/2083/commits/f45b51b672c0b7ee9da1e5795cf72a5193a1d91b)

    <https://juju.is/docs/sdk/charm-documentation>`_

.. important::

    In :ref:`recipes <charmcraft-yaml-file>`, this is now the
    ``links.documentation`` key.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) A link to a documentation cover page on Discourse:
    docs: <url>

``extra-bindings``
------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) Extra bindings for the charm. For example binding extra network
    # interfaces. Key only map, value must be blank. Key represents the name.
    extra-bindings:
      # Key only map; key represents the name of the binding
      <binding name>:

``issues``
----------

.. important::

    In :ref:`recipes <charmcraft-yaml-file>`, this is now the ``links.issues`` key.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) A string (or a list of strings) containing a link (or links) to the charm
    # bug tracker.
    issues: <url> | {ref}`<urls>]

``maintainers``
---------------

.. important::

    In :ref:`recipes <charmcraft-yaml-file>`, this is now the ``links.contact`` key.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # (Optional) A list of maintainers in the format "First Last <email>"
    maintainers:

>         - <maintainer>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - <maintainer>
```
